Hi.
And welcome back.
This is video we're going to start looking at packages.
So what are packages.
Well packages first of all are modules but modules are not necessarily packages so you can think of
a package as kind of a more specialized module and they specialized in the sense that they can contain
modules.
So these are modules that can contain modules.
And of course since packages are modules packages can also contain packages.
And those are sometimes called sub packages.
So if a module is a package then it must have a value set for that Dunder path property modules that
are not packages do not have that value set.
So after you've imported a module you can easily see if that module is a package by inspecting that
Baff attribute.
If it's empty it's a module.
It could be empty or not present either of the two.
And if it's nonempty So it's present and it's not empty then it's a package.
So let's look at the relationship between packages and file systems.
Now remember that non-fuel technically don't have to be entities in a file system.
That's what we have loaders and finders for.
But by the same token there are four packages also do not have to be entities in the file system.
Typically they are just as typically modules or file system entities as well.
When we write a python application we write files in the file system they located in directories the
file names the file names correspond to the module names.
So you know most of the time that's how we write python applications.
But technically modules and packages don't have to be files however packages still represent a hierarchy
of modules and packages even if they're not written to file.
There's still a hierarchy of these packages and modules modules are inside packages packages can be
inside other packages.
So for example we could have this kind of path.
We could have a package called package one that contains a model called mod 1 or we could have a package
one that contains another package package one underscore one that contains a module mod one underscore
one.
This is not necessarily a file path.
So you know in the file system this is just a dot notation to indicate the hierarchy of packages and
modules.
So that's all that dotted notation indicates.
And usually you'll find this in the Dundalk path that's usually where you'll find it.
You'll also find that sometimes in the underscore the double underscore the Dunder package property.
So let's look at importing nested packages.
So if you've got a statement in your toplevel program such as PAC one dot PAC one underscore one dot
module one.
Now this may not be file based.
For now I'm talking very generically.
So we have this kind of hierarchy in our packages and we want to import this module that's nested inside
this package that is itself nested inside this package.
The import system will perform the following steps.
The first thing it's going to do.
It's going to import pack one because it can't import the rest until pack one has been imported.
Because this is nested underneath.
So the first thing it does is it imports Pack 1 then it imports pack one underscore one that's inside
PAC 1.
And then finally it imports that module that we want it to.
And then the system modules cache will therefore contain entries for Pack 1 pack 1 that pack 1 underscore
1 the sub package as well as the module in the sub package.
So when you import this over here then you'll find that each bounce basically of that path has to get
imported and it will get cached insists modules.
Now the name space with the import was run will just contain Pack 1.
It doesn't contain Module 1 because we're importing the whole thing and it's going to put that top level
name inside if we want in our namespace if we want module one in our namespace we would have to say
something like.
From Pack 1 Depak 1 underscore one import module one will still end up with all the stuff in the system
modules cache but aren't local namespace will contain module one.
Pack 1 just as we so have regular module impuls
So although modules and packages can be far more generic than file system based and that is it actually
gets really complicated.
And if you're interested in this and you want to write your own fine doesn't load.
Then you really need to go and read Pepp three or two.
But I'm not going to do that in this cause it's really complicated.
And so I'm going to stick to the traditional file based modules and packages since that's what you know
99 percent of the work done when programming Python uses it's file based stuff.
So I'm going to stick to that.
It's difficult enough as it is.
So let's now stick to file based packages so everything I'm going to talk about from now on is full
file based packages.
First of all the package paths are created by using the file system directories and files.
Since we're now a file system based kind of set up so I remember a package is simply a module that can
contain other modules and packages.
So how do we represent that in the file system.
It's a directory right.
A directory is something that contains other directories and files.
Same thing with packages.
Packages can contain other packages and modules so we represent packages in our file system using a
directory and the modules are the files.
So the directory name becomes the package name just as the module file name became the module name the
directory name becomes the package name.
So where does the code go for the package.
Because it is a module after all and modules have code.
So if the package is the directory a directory can't contain code right the directory can contain files
but it can't be itself you know a file it's either a directory or a file on the file system.
So where does the code go for the package while it goes inside the directory in a special file that's
called Dunder init that p y.
So when we have a package we actually have a directory and this file and together that becomes the module
the module code is in in the init file and the package name is the directory.
So let's look at that in more detail.
So to define a package in our file system because we're file based Now we must create a directory whose
name will be the package name and we must create a file called dunderheaded duppy y inside that directory
that init the file is what tells Python that the Directory is a package as opposed to a standard directory.
So when Python looks at our code it sees a directory.
It's just a directory.
But if it now finds a dunder init file inside that directory it changes the behavior.
It now considers that directory as a package.
Now if we don't have an init file then Python creates what's called an implicit namespace package and
we'll discuss that later.
It's related to packages but it's created implicitly and this is why we're able to import modules that
are nested inside directories that aren't necessarily packages but well we'll discuss that in a little
bit.
So what happens when a file based package is imported.
So let's say we have the following structure all out.
This is our app root.
And inside we created a directory called Pack 1 in the directory we created this Dunder init file.
So now pack 1 will be identified as a package and then this package will contain 2 modules Module 1
and module 2 which are straight you know simple modules.
Let's say we write import Pack 1.
So now we're importing a package.
It's a module but it's also a package.
So there's a bit more going on.
Well the code for Pack 1 is in the Dundreary file.
So that code is loaded executed and cached insists modules where the key of Pack 1 and the object will
be a module object.
OK but the code for Pack 1 for that module came from this file over here.
But again it's just a module.
Now the symbol Pack 1 is added to our namespace referencing the same object.
Again it's just a module.
If we had said import you know module one that let's say was at the root of app what would have done
it would have loaded executed and cached it in six modules and it would have added a reference to that
module in all namespace while one is told just a module.
Yes it's a package.
So it has additional functionality but it's just a module.
The things you know the import works the same way.
The only difference now is that it has a path property.
It has this done the path property that gets set.
Remember we discussed that with modules that they don't have that packages have the path properties
set and it will be what it will be the file system directory path the absolute path to pack 1.
So wherever APIs sitting let's say it's sitting on your drive if you're on you know on Windows or your
C-drive or if you're if you're in Linux maybe it's sitting in your user directory you'll have the fully
qualified path to whatever the directory is.
That that is represented or that represents the package.
And it also has a done to file property modules also have it done the file property remember what the
done to file properties for modules.
It's the file that contains the code for the module.
So what do you think is going to be the file property for a package.
It's going to be the path to the Dunder init file because that's the file that contains the code for
the package.
And again it will be an absolute path so what about nested packages what packages can contain modules
as well as packages.
So both can be nested inside packages.
So let's say we have this kind of structure.
Here's our application.
We have a package in the root of the application.
So it's a directory with the Dondre in it.
That's a package.
And it also contains two modules.
Module one module one B.
It also contains another directory pack one underscore one that itself contains a Dundreary in it.
So now pack one underscore one is also a package and that package also contains two modules as well
module 1 1 and one 1 be.
So that's the directory structure.
So module one is inside a package one.
And so we can think of this module as being pack one dot Module 1 8.
That's the path the dotted path notation for Module 1 8 it's inside that one this package is inside
Pack 1 pack 1 underscore one is inside Pack 1.
So in terms of dotted path notation we can think of it as Pack 1 dot Pack 1 underscore one again.
That's just the dotted path notation.
Now this module 1 1 B is inside.
Pack 1 pack 1 1 and so in terms of dotted notation we would reference it as Pack 1 dot back 1 1 dot
Module 1 1 be.
So now let's look at the file path and package properties for all this.
So as we've seen before modules have a file and package properties.
The file is the location of the module code in the file system package is the package that the module
code is located in.
Now if the module is located in the root of our application then it's just an empty string.
The package is just an empty string because that's kind of the root package.
Now if the module is also a package then it also has a path property modules don't but packages modules
in general don't.
But packages specialized modules do.
And it will be the location of the package the directory in the file system.
So let's look at an example.
Let's go back to this again specific set up so if we look at module which is in the root I added a module
in the root of our application.
Well the module file is going to be the absolute path to this module.
So it's going to be wherever your app is located slash app slash module duppy y.
If we look at the path that's not set it's a regular standard model not a package therefore it doesn't
have a path property set and the package while it's sitting in the root of our application.
So the package exists but it's an empty string.
Ok so what about package one.
So package one is a package a directory with an in it.
So what is its final property.
Well the file property just points to the in that inside that directory.
So pack 1 Dungarvan it again fully qualified path.
What about the path.
Well this time it's set because it is a package and the path is simply the fully qualified system file
that writes the file system path.
So it's wherever the app is sitting slash pack 1.
That is the directory after all in the file system.
What about the package.
Well you're the package is just now this data notation that we've been talking about.
So the package is Pack 1 because Pack 1 is a package.
So that's itself a package.
Now what about the modules under the pack one that are contained in Pack 1.
So let's take a look at multihull one a while in terms of its file property.
Again it just isn't absolute path to module one AOP wired to the file in the file system the path property
of module one is not set because it is not a package.
It's just a file.
It's just a simple module and then package.
Well this tells us which package module one is in while it's in fact one.
So just as package we all pack one package was pack one because it is itself.
Anything that's underneath will be inside package one.
Let's take a look at the sub package one one.
Now it's file while it's file property is simply the location of the Dunder ranit file in the file system.
The fully qualified path.
What about the underscore the Dunder path property.
Well that is going to be basically the fully qualified path to the directory that is the package and
then the done the package property is set.
Since this is a package and it's worked well it's back 1 1 but inside Pack 1.
So we get this dotted path notation of PAC 1 dot PAC 1 underscore 1.
What about the modules inside of Pack 1 1.
Well again we can go and find and specify the modular we're interested in.
It's the you know the parents package the sub package and then the module.
If we look at the Dunder file property it's going to give us the fully qualified path to the module
file the path property of course is not set.
This is not a package it's a module.
So that isn't set and the package Well that tells us which package this module is in.
It's inside another package and which one pack one dot PAC 1 underscore one.
So what actually gets loaded during the Imphal phase.
Let's again take the same example that we have.
And let's say that we write this statement in our main app lets say you know we have this module the
P Y and let's say we write in the import pack one 1. pack one under US Code one dot module one on this
code one a.
So we're trying to import this file over here.
So at the very least the following will happen.
Pack 1 will be important because Python basically can't reach module 1 underscore 1 8 on less.
It has loaded things in that's in its path.
So pack 1 is going to be imported and added to the CIS modules cache next pack one on this cold one
is also going to get imported and add it to the sists Mongols cache.
And then finally module one underscore one is imported and added to the CIS modules.
And then what will happen is that you'll end up with pack one in your namespace of wherever you did
that.
Impled find did it from module then the module Goebels would contain Pack 1.
But the thing is modules can import other modules.
Right.
A module can have an import statement in it.
So in particular the package module could import other modules and packages as well.
We could put code inside that Dunder init duppy why file that itself.
Import other stuff and same thing with pack one underscore one.
It could import other modules and packages and also Marjoe itself could import other modules and packages
as well.
So at the very least when you do this import these three things are going to get imported.
But depending on what these actually do individually you may have other things that get imported and
put into the system modules cache.
So let's take a look at an example.
Let's say that the Dunder file full package one contains this code it says import Pack 1 module 1 a.
So basically when packet one is run is executed when this module is executed it does to impuls it imports
these two modules over here.
So I fully qualified the location.
It's Pack 1 doctor module one and unpack one module one be.
So now let's say that we write this impled in our module to the wire in our root module over here.
OK.
So we're importing this just as before.
So just as before.
Pack 1 is imported back 1 1 is imported Module 1 1 is imported as well and they're all added to the
system modules cache but now also module one is imported because we have this import statement that
got executed when did it get imported when packet 1 got executed.
So in fact one was imported it executed the code for that module which itself did those to import.
So now module one is in this modules and module one b.s also been imported and has been added to CIS
modules as well.
Let's say that we just did import Pack 1.
So the same set up everything's the same.
We still have that code inside and under init file for the back one module or package.
So import pack one will pack one is important and added ptosis modules module one is imported and added
to CIS modules and module one be as important added to sists modules and that's it.
It's not going to import pack 1:01 or import these because while we haven't actually asked it to import
it.
So if that code file Dunder and it is empty then nothing else will happen.
And actually even if this is not empty since we're not actually loading package one underscore one that
package module will not actually get executed because it's not being imported.
All right let's switch to some code and let's actually see all this in action.
Thanks for watching and I'll see you in the next video.